## Nourich: Disease Specific Diet Management System
Objective: The goal of the system is to analyze whether a given recipe is suitable for specific chronic conditions (diabetes) or not. In addition, the system aims to provide alternative recipes or a revised recipe through ingredient and cooking method substitutions. 

Challenges: Analyzing recipe suitability for diabetes involves investigating the suitability of ingredients, cooking methods, and their interactions. This requires structured presentation from unstructured data (e.g., natural language, images) to draw individual inferences on the suitability of ingredients, cooking methods, and their interactions. This requires compositional reasoning, where the problem is broken into sub-problems, drawing individual inferences, and is combined to form a final decision on suitability. Analyzing the suitability of these individual components requires contextual knowledge, such as nutrition, disease-specific guidelines, glycemic index, and cooking method effects with low-level data elevated to high-level concepts (e.g., "potato is a healthy carbohydrate"). Although general generative models are trained on extensive data, extracting disease-specific dietary constraints from their embedding space and establishing relationships between concepts to draw inferences remains a significant challenge \cite{}. In such high-stakes domains, incorrect recommendations can be harmful, so the model must explain the reasons and also trace its reasoning to trusted knowledge sources.


#### C3AN for Nourich
We propose Nourich, a disease specific diet management system designed to offer personalized dietary recommendations to individuals with specific constraints as described in Figure \ref{}. Such complex challenges of the domain and its objective requires a comprehensive framework like C3AN to ensure safe and trustworthy AI systems whose outputs can be relied on to take a decisive action.

* Composite orchestration: Nourich system requires following steps to analyze the suitability of the recipes as follows (i) recipe image to recipe text generation model (ii) ingredient extraction from recipe text as per usage order (iii) cooking method extraction from recipe text (iv) relationship extraction between ingredients and cooking methods from recipe text (for example, mix:[salt, pepper], grill:[steak]) (v) map ingredient and cooking method names of recipes to the names in the knowledge base to gather suitability reasons with in the context of health conditions (for example, potato $\rightarrow$ healthy carbohydrate $\rightarrow$ recommend, sour cream $\rightarrow$ high fat $\rightarrow$ avoid) (vi) based on these individual inferences, compositionally reason and present the overall suitability of the recipe with explanations. Small scale specific models are implemented to execute each task where models are required to learn only specific patterns. This sequential modular workflow also allows for replacing components as necessary and ensures greater flexibility, easier error detection, and efficient adaptation to new requirements or improvements without disrupting the entire system.


* Custom Workflow: Nourich is trained using only the data and knowledge that are directly relevant to the task at hand, ensuring a highly tailored and efficient approach. This custom workflow significantly reduces the need for large, resource-intensive language models (LLMs), which typically require substantial computational resources for training and operation. By focusing on domain-specific information, Nourich is able to achieve high performance without the overhead associated with general-purpose LLMs, making it more accessible and scalable for deployment on devices with limited hardware capabilities.


* Compact Focus: Mission-critical enterprise applications are prevalent not only in organizations with substantial computational resources but also across various industries. This underscores the necessity of developing applications and systems that can operate effectively on modest hardware configurations, ensuring accessibility to a broader user base. In the case of Nourich, it is essential for these models to be deployable on mobile devices, enabling users to capture images of food and query its suitability in the context of diabetes.

* Neurosymbolic AI: In high-stakes domains, where incorrect outputs could have detrimental consequences, end-to-end embedding-based models may not be suitable. Embeddings, being approximation vectors that map words into embedding spaces, inherently involve information loss due to their approximative nature. Consequently, errors can arise, and when compounded within a complex pipeline, the magnitude of these errors can escalate. Therefore, there is a critical need for neurosymbolic models, where neural components are responsible for pattern recognition, and symbolic components support decision-making, ensuring greater accuracy and reliability. The 14 foundational elements ensure trustworthy AI systems while neurosymbolic nature facilitates development of these 14 elements. The necessity of 14 foundational elements are described in Table \ref{tab:14features}.


The system incorporates several types of knowledge to enhance recipe analysis. Taxonomy refers to the hierarchical relationships among entities, where cooking methods and ingredient categories are organized in a structured manner. Causal knowledge captures the effects of specific events, such as how grilling meat produces carcinogens. Logical Constructs are curated for recipe analysis, where rules like "if an ingredient is high in cholesterol, it is unsuitable for diabetes" help guide decision-making. Furthermore, the system uses Rules to infer implicit knowledge, such as the rule that if the carbohydrate-to-fiber ratio of an ingredient is 10:1, it can be classified as a whole grain, suitable for diabetes; otherwise, it is not considered whole grain. Such variety of knowledge incorporation also demonstrates the need for neurosymbolic systems.


<iframe src="Dissertation-ppt-view.pdf" width="100%" height="600px"></iframe>
